Today, I'm chatting with Ada Palmer,
who's a Renaissance historian, a
novelist, a composer, based at the
University of Chicago. And today we're
discussing your book, Inventing the
Renaissance. Ada, thanks for coming on
the podcast.
>> Been looking forward. First question.
You've got in this period in the late
15th century, early 16th century in
Italy, all these different republics.
Venice, Florence, Genoa.
Um, and that seems unusual both for the
time period and for the place. Yeah.
>> What gives? One of the big reasons that
the Italian city republics are clustered
in Italy is that when the Roman Empire
dissolved in the West,
individual cities then needed to
self-govern. And this is true all across
Europe, right? And those individual
cities could no longer get the
centralized Roman government to oversee
supply routes, keep the roads free of
bandits. Uh, you could no longer import
and export goods at scale. You could no
longer rely on central infrastructure.
You had to support things yourself.
Larger, wealthier towns were able to
make this transition because they could
support themselves from the local
resources and the farms attached to
them. So, the larger, wealthier towns
surrounded by good agricultural land
were more successful at converting over
to, "Okay, let's have a senate like the
old Roman senate. Let's have our top
families form a council. They will rule.
We'll set up a republic." A weaker town
that can't support itself as well is
much more prone to one wealthy family
realizes that they can get goons and
take over and declare themselves the
monarch of the area. Or worse, this town
cannot self-sustain. It doesn't have
enough. People there can't get food.
They are scared. They're afraid of being
robbed by people who are desperate. But
outside of town, there is a wealthy
villa that belongs to a noble family and
they have bodyguards. "Hey, noble
family, if I move next to your villa and
work for you, will you protect me with
your bodyguards? So, towns emptied out
and villages, as in villa and its
environs, developed as a result. And a
village was a monarchal structure in
this sense that was the migration of
people out of a town into the protection
zone of a local lordling, right? And
then those villages grew to different
scale. Some of them cities, some not.
So, Italy had great agriculture and
great agricultural land. So, more of
Italy's cities were able to sustain
themselves as towns and be republics.
I feel like
the big take of your book is they're
trying to resuscitate
Roman virtues. What were the things that
What were the virtues that the Roman
emperors had which allowed this you
know, the safety and good government
etc. to work? And um I don't understand
the connection between reading Cicero
and contemplating the virtues of a great
emperor to dot dot dot science and
technology.
>> [laughter]
>> Uh maybe there isn't one, but do you
think there is one and what what exactly
is that connection? Well, as with many
processes, the answer is there are
multiple steps and it's complicated and
some of the steps are realizing that the
earlier steps didn't work.
So, Petrarch
who lives through the Black Death and
lives in a moment when Italy is racked
by civil war
and uh foreign mercenary troops are
raiding and pillaging. Italy is racked
by bandits. When Petrarch survives the
Black Death after losing so many
friends, he gets a letter uh two of his
friends are alive. Uh he had given up
that anyone he knew would survive, but
two of his younger scholar friends are
alive. They're going to come visit him.
On the way they were attacked by bandits
and one of them was killed and the other
was lost in the mountains and wounded
and he didn't know that his friend was
alive for another year and a half,
right? So, the bandits are very real in
this period and Petrarch looks around
him and says, "This is an age of ash and
shadow.
Uh what we need is to imitate the arts
of the ancients. Let's try to figure out
how the Romans did it."
And specifically, the problem is our
leaders. Our leaders are selfish. Our
leaders care more about their wealth and
their family honor and their power than
they do about the people.
This is where Romeo and Juliet is really
helpful for us to understand, right?
Lord Montague and Lord Capulet, as their
goons are knifing each other in the
street, they care about defeating each
other.
Do they care about the good of Italy?
Do they care about the good of the city
of Verona? No. Their feud is harming the
city of Verona and they don't care.
Uh they demand that Romeo get away with
murder because he is their son, right?
Uh that is not service to the state. And
uh Petrarch reads about the ancient
Roman Brutus, not the one who killed
Caesar, but the ancestor to whom that
one was trying to live up. Brutus, one
of the first consuls of Rome, and he
learned while in office that his sons
were plotting to take over the state and
make him king.
So, he executed his own sons for treason
against the state. Can you imagine Lord
Montague wanting to execute Romeo for
treason against Verona? He would never
do that. So, when you're living in the
plot of Romeo and Juliet and you read
about these ancient Roman figures as
described in the lofty lofty biographies
of someone like Livy,
you read them and you say, "Wow, if only
our leaders would act like that." Well,
how were they raised? Can we raise our
leaders the same way? Can we make
libraries filled with what young Cicero
read and what young Brutus read? What
did they read? Well, they read Plato and
they read Homer. So, we need these
things. Can we recreate the educational
environment that produced them?
And Petrarch suggests this. His students
and successors embrace this idea and
pour money into traveling across the
Alps to look for manuscripts, traveling
to Constantinople to purchase
manuscripts from the wealthier East
where books are common,
and bringing them back to assemble these
libraries and then raise tutors like
Marsilio Ficino who can know Greek and
Latin and in
surround the young princes and
princesses of Europe with these values
in the hopes that they will act like
Brutus and not like Cicero. This is
based on an assumption that education is
very much like osmosis. That if you're
exposed to something, you'll imitate it.
And the uptake of this is strong because
Italy is also full of upstart rulers who
just seized power 5 minutes ago by
having a coup in their state and have no
legitimacy and no right to be ruling
what they're ruling and are resented by
their people, but they can dress up like
a Roman emperor and they can have a
parade with allegorical figures of the
virtues next to them and they can invest
in an impressive palace that has a
pediment on the front and looks like a
Roman building to the to the eyes of the
period and um
uh cover themselves with the trappings
of antiquity and then people might look
at them and say, "Oh, this guy is
different from what we've had. This guy
is like the Caesars." The days of the
Caesars were pretty good. Maybe we want
this guy. Maybe he's not going to be a
tyrant. Maybe he's going to be a good
prince and he's going to make a golden
age. And so, the first dream is
idealistic. Let's make better rulers.
The adoption is self-serving and
propagandistic. Hey, I'm a tyrant, but I
can seem like something better than just
a tyrant. If I make myself look like
Julius Caesar, then people will like and
respect me. Or in the case of Florence
with the Medici, we are merchant scum
and we are dirt compared to everybody
around us. We're not even one of the
important families of Florence. We're
like three ranks down even on the
standards of merchant scum. We're extra
scummy merchant scum. But, if we can
have Latin and Greek and quote Cicero
and seem like the ancients, people will
take us seriously and respect us and
talk to us even if we don't have it. So,
let me give
an example, right? So, imagine that you
are
an ambassador from France and you're on
your way to Rome uh cuz a new pope has
just been elected. And whenever a new
pope is elected, every country in Europe
has to send a special ambassador whose
job it is to deliver a long-winded
oration that says
"I am the wealthy I'm I'm the ambassador
from a very wealthy country and a very
powerful prince and he's so glad you're
the pope. Congratulations." Only have to
do that for like an hour. Um and you
have to give a gift to the pope and it
has to be very impressive and you have
to be a really important person. You're
like the most important person who can
leave your country without causing a
political crisis. You might be the heir
to the throne, for example. Um and so
you're on your way or you might be a a
more minor ambassador, but you're at
least minimum the son of a count. And
you're on your way to Rome. You're
heading along the length of Italy.
You're going to go through Florence.
It's on the way. Uh
but there's nobody there
worth talking to because it's just a pit
of scum and villainy. And in fact also
filth and depravity because of course
Florence is the sodomy capital of
Europe. And to Florentine is the verb
for anal sex in several different
European languages. And in the laws of
France, you can be indicted for sodomy
on the grounds that you have ever once
in your life even visited Florence.
That's considered evidence enough. So,
you're on your way to this matchlessly
filthy dive of scum and villainy. And
then you approach the city
and there are these statues.
And they look like ancient statues, the
kind that are so lifelike that it's as
if they're about to breathe and move.
You've never seen an intact new statue
like that. That isn't something we know
how to do.
And you ride through the city a bit, and
it's a large, impressive city, and you
get to the cathedral. It has this
massive dome, way bigger than anything
you've ever seen except for old Roman
ruins.
And you come to the banker's house, and
you knock at the door, or your servant
knocks at the door, and then banker
greets you humbly at the door and
apologizes that his humble palace is not
worthy to host your Excellency. And
you're like, "Yeah, it's not. You're
correct." Um,
and he invites you in. And the instant
you step inside, you're in a space like
nothing you've ever seen before with
white light streaming in through this
airy, rounded, windowed courtyard
that feels more clean and outdoors than
the outdoors did. Uh, because something
about the air is cool and fresh. It's
like nothing you've Wait, wait.
It is. It's like the Roman ruins in the
backyard of the castle where you grew
up.
But we don't have the ability to do that
anymore. All that's lost.
And in the middle of the square is
another one of these bronze statues that
looks like it's about to come to life,
except
shining and new, it hasn't even turned
green yet.
And around the courtyard are busts of
all the Roman emperors in order. And
above them are portraits of this guy and
the members of his family. And off in
the corner are some men wearing robes
that look kind of like the robes the
ancients wear. And you say, "Who are
those guys?" And he says, "Oh, they're
Platonists. They're speaking ancient
Greek." And you say,
"I thought I didn't understand that
language, but ancient Greek is lost. We
don't have ancient Greek." And he says,
"Yes, you know, the We have lots of
ancient Greek here." And he said And you
say, "And also, we don't have the works
of Plato. They're also lost." "Oh, we
have lots of Plato here. Look, here's my
grandson, Lorenzo. He's just written a
poem in ancient Greek about the the
parts of the soul. Would you like to
hear him recite it?" And now there's a
10-year-old boy reciting a poem in you
in ancient Greek about the three parts
of the soul. And you're like, "Where am
[laughter] I? None of this is possible.
None of this has existed for a thousand
years."
That's the moment that Cosimo de' Medici
turns to you and said,
"Would you like to make an alliance with
Florence?"
And you can say no. You can say, "No, my
king is going to come over the Alps
with his enormous army, and descend upon
this city, and we're going to sack it,
and everyone's going to let us cuz it
has no friends because it doesn't have
any nobility, so it can't marry anybody,
so it has no meaningful allies. And also
it's in the middle of this
Guelph-Ghibelline feud, so all of its
neighbors hate it, so they're just going
to let it burn.
And we're going to take the enormous
piles of gold that are in your
basements,
and go home rich, and all this will be
gone, like a dream."
Or you could say yes. Let's make an
alliance. Give me
a bronze smith, and an architect, and a
Greek teacher, and a Platonist, and
we're going to take all of these things,
and we're going to do the French court
like this. And then when the ambassador
from Portugal comes,
he's going to feel like an uncultured
fool, just like I feel right now.
The power dynamic just flipped upside
down.
Right? And suddenly the condescending
nobleman is in awe of the merchant scum.
That's what the art and the culture does
as a propagandistic tool.
The next stage of it then is, okay,
we've raised these princes like this,
and they have the Latin, and they have
the Greek, and they can impress
everybody. And then they fight a bigger,
nastier, worse war than any of the
earlier big, nasty wars, and with more
deaths, and more betrayals, and bigger
cannons knocking down cities, and and
burning whole areas and the wealth is
centralized, so the mercenaries are more
numerous because people can can produce
more. You know, the first generations
raised by this are supposed to be
philosopher princes and instead we get
Cesare and Lucrezia Borgia. Both of whom
had Latin and Greek and Cicero and Plato
when they were kids, and then it grows
up and Valentino sets fire to half the
world. I mean, Cesare
sets fire to half the world, right? So,
that is the war Machiavelli watched.
And Machiavelli
was raised on all of the Cicero and
Livy, right? He was raised on the
Petrarchan project. He has this famous
beautiful letter that he wrote in exile
where he's describing his day to his
friend, and that most of the day is
wasted and he mucks around hunting for
larks, and then he goes to a pub and
gets drunk in the company of uncultured
countrymen.
And then he goes home and he
gets dressed in the court robes, the
court finery that he would wear back
when he was an ambassador to popes and
kings, and attired thus, he then enters
his library to hold commerce with the
ancients. Right? He loves this the way
Petrarch wanted him to love it. But he
observes these wars and he observes
virtuous princes like Guidobaldo da
Montefeltro who does every single thing
you're supposed to do virtuously and he
has all the Plato and he has all the
libraries and he has all the art and he
gets betrayed and his city taken away
from him and loses everything.
And he watches terrible people like
Cesare Borgia and Julius the Second make
terrible choices and succeed. And he
says, "Okay, well, clearly
Petrarch was wrong that just reading the
Cicero would make successful rulers like
the Caesars, but I still feel in my
heart a deep power in the classics." So,
he says,
"What if the libraries are what we need,
but we need to use them differently? And
he proposes what we would think of as
political science. We observe
historical examples. We say, "Okay, here
are five examples of battles that
happened next to rivers. We'll put those
examples side by side and see what
decisions the commanders made to try to
figure out which one worked better. We
use history as a casebook of examples of
what worked and what didn't. And we
imitate what worked and we avoid doing
what didn't instead of feeling that
reading about good men will make us
good.
We read about wise choices and we
imitate those choices. This is one of
the reasons why Machiavelli is described
by his contemporaries as a historian.
And he says we need to use history and
use the classics differently. He
proposes that. He isn't very popular in
his own day. It takes a long time for
that to catch on. Many people for
decades after him are still trying to
use it sort of the absorb it osmotically
way, but he's writing that in the early
1500s, so it's been a little over a
century since this started. We have to
remember how long this process is.
Um from Petrarch's first call to
Machiavelli writing that is as long as
from Yuri Gagarin's space flight back to
Napoleon.
Uh the childhood of Napoleon to the
space race. That's Petrarch to
Machiavelli. We think of it as one time
period, but a lot changed in that. They
had a plan, they tried the plan, they
brought the plan to its maximum, they
raised all the princes in this new way.
The wars happened, it clearly failed.
Machiavelli then thinks about why it
failed. We're still only halfway through
Renaissance. Uh Shakespeare's
grandparents have barely been born. We
have a lot more time to go. So, what do
we need?
>> [sighs]
>> We need new ways of thinking about it.
And we're reading the ancients, so we
have bigger libraries. We're We have the
printing press now. We're having
libraries in smaller towns. More and
more people can read. It's easier and
easier to get an education. More people
are starting to learn about science.
It also is important that they're
inventing microtechnologies of book
production like footnotes
and glossaries in the margin that
explain the hard vocabulary. So that
when Petrarch's
successors like Ficino was young, you
had to be a masterful Latinist to read
these ancients. You had to have an
enormous vocabulary. There are no
dictionaries. There are no glosses.
There's nothing to help you. Only a tiny
slice of expert Latin classes is going
to actually read this stuff. By 100
years later, there are translations into
the vernacular. There are footnotes that
tell you the hard vocabulary. Any med
student can read Lucretius's discussions
of materialist information. When Poggio
found it, there were two dozen people in
the world who could read it.
100 years later,
30,000 people can read it in the 30
print editions that are printed before
1600. When all different kinds of people
read it, med students, law students,
people in different countries, people in
different places, they ask new
questions.
They wonder whether they can test the
hypotheses. They do test the hypotheses.
They're the generation that develop
discovers that the heart is a pump.
They're the generation that takes
seriously
the question, maybe there are atoms and
maybe that's how diseases work and maybe
we can develop the germ theory of
disease. That's the
1560s, 1580s. 180 years after 160 years
after Lucretius comes back.
Because it takes generations of work to
build the libraries, to have the
libraries, to use the libraries. So when
we get to 1600, which is almost exactly
200 years after this begins, a little
bit more.
We've had time to say, let's make the
libraries,
have the libraries, use the libraries,
realize we failed in how we use the
libraries, use the libraries
differently.
And that's the generation of Francis
Bacon and Galileo, who say, "Hey, let's
use the information differently. Let's
use nature as a casebook of examples,
the way Machiavelli said we should use
history. Let's examine, let's doubt,
let's rethink, let's do stuff in new
ways."
Okay,
just to make sure I understood it. So,
that the chain of causation here is
we got to resuscitate the virtues of the
Romans, therefore read what they read.
Um you to do that, you need to build the
libraries.
Uh you build the libraries, you
resuscitate all those arts. Basically,
and then you just need to have people be
literate, have people think about
think about information in a new way to
analyze it. And that analysis also lends
itself not just to history of leaders,
but also to the nature of the world. Um
whenever I hear a story about, "Well,
this is why the scientific revolution
happened, the industrial revolution
happened." I'm like,
but there's so many stories, and it's
just hard to figure out why this one
over the other ones. There's like, you
know, a a dozen other stories you could
tell. I had a previous guest, Joseph
Henrich, who has this theory that the
Catholic Church is breaking down these
old kinship-based networks that the
rest of the world has, and it's
encouraging guilds, it's encouraging
these kinds of
uh centers where people can get get
together and discuss ideas.
There's probably five, you know, 20
other stories you could tell.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
Why this story? So,
two different reasons. One, I think it's
useful to think about
for new ideas to flourish, and new ways
of running the world to happen, you need
a fertile environment. In the same way
that for forest to grow, you need enough
topsoil, right? And it takes a while to
get that topsoil.
>> Yeah. It takes a while to get enough
books.
Mhm. Right? You need to have enough
books for a bunch of people to be
reading and thinking. You also need to
have networks of information moving the
stuff back and forth so that they can
have discourses of ideas with each
other. You can't publish a scientific
journal until there are journals.
Right? You need to have to have
developed this ecosystem of information
and knowledge. Um people talk about it
sometimes in terms of increasing
literacy rates as if higher literacy
makes there be more books instead of the
other way around. Mhm. Uh and in fact
there's a lot of more literacy than
people imagine in even medieval Italy.
Almost uh Florence has a male literacy
rate of 90%. As of the 16th century? As
of the 12th century.
>> Huh.
Uh because everybody's in the merchant
world. So you have to be able to send
letters. You have to be able to read
account books. You have to be able to
calculate your tab at a restaurant. But
of those people how many have read a
book? Very few.
They've read letters, they've read
tallies, they've read indexes, they've
made notes. The difference between being
literate and being book literate
is different. Right? In the same way
that some people watch television, don't
watch very many films. Other people
watch lots of films, right? You can be
literate and have never read a book.
Because there are might be almost no
books in the entire city in which you
grew up
if it's 1200 or 1500.
But if it's 1600, there are definitely
books in any medium-sized town.
And so literacy transforms into a kind
of access to scientific, intellectual,
legal, all sorts of different kinds of
worlds of ideas.
Now the other person you quoted who's
talking about transformations in um
um networks of power from being less
family and clan-centered to being more,
you know, guild-centered. The guilds are
major generators of ideas as well. The
guilds can own libraries by 1600. Where
if you went to a guild hall, it will
have a bunch of books about its own
trade. That would not have been true in
1100. So, those changes are all real and
they're all intermixing and they're all
parallel to each other. And you need all
of these things together. But one of the
focuses I have is
sometimes there are more steps to
something than you think. Right? And we
tell the story of the Renaissance of
when the Renaissance they rediscover
these ancient texts and then we got
science. And that's true.
But it is an oversimplification and too
wide a zoom.
And if I said
in the French Revolution, Napoleon rose
to power and spread nationalized warfare
across Europe and then we landed on the
moon.
I've skipped some steps.
>> Right. Right?
And we know that about modernity, but we
don't remember that about earlier
periods. Yeah.
I mean, obviously all the stories are
all somewhat true, but to the extent
that this is a part of the story, the
idea that you're building up libraries
of classics and dot dot dot setting up a
network of information exchange that
leads to the scientific revolution. I
think
the reason this
feels important or salient is right now
I think a lot of people have this idea
that I'm going to
make AI go well by doing X thing and I
maybe some of those things work, but
it's
at the same time sort of frustrating but
also finding it interesting that
historically nobody has a good track
record of being able to say, I will do
this thing so that this huge
unanticipated change in history
will go my way or according to my values
or according to what I value.
>> Right. And I I think the go go my way as
opposed to go well is a really important
distinction. Yeah. Uh because the
you know, Petrarch wanted a world with
these values.
>> Yeah. And in what he thought, for
example, that this would be a triumph
for Christianity and what we would call
Catholicism, though there's only one
Christianity from his point of view at
the time that he's happening, except for
the East, which is different. Um
uh you know, he was sure that when we
found the ancients, fundamentally all of
their philosophy would agree with
Christianity.
That the great ancients were wise,
therefore they will be correct. And, you
know, Plato will 90% agree with
Christianity. It just needs like a
little shaker of the Trinity on top to
be Christianity. And when he says, "Go
find these ancients," he, of course, is
in a world that doesn't have the
ancients yet.
Right? The world doesn't have the
ancients yet, so it
um
uh he's just guessing what's going to be
in these books.
But he says, "If we find them, they will
uphold good values." And everyone
believes him.
And then they go find them, and they
squabble with each other. And there are
heatedness, and Epicureans, and Stoics,
and all sorts of chaotic things, much
more plural than he anticipated. And it
makes a world that in turn has giant
wars, which he would not like, and a
crisis, and Machiavelli's critique of
the ancients, and then uh the new
science and the new philosophy, and
eventually Galileo, none of which
resembles what Petrarch imagined if he
had specifically described the future he
was trying to make.
>> Yeah.
But
then we get to uh the propagators of
Bacon's scientific method, meaning
Voltaire and Montesquieu, who are also
big campaigners for inoculation against
smallpox. And the first major disease
eradications start to begin under that
immediate influence. And the science
that gets us to the germ theory of
disease, which gets us to modern
hygiene, which gets us again to
vaccines, which gets us to penicillin,
and
the treatment for the Black Death.
Petrarch thought he would make a world
which shared his values. Instead, he
made a world that doesn't share his
values, but that is capable of curing a
disease he never imagined would be
curable.
And if you showed him this future, it
would be scary.
It would be weird to him because it does
not embrace his values. Our values are
different. He would be horrified by
democracy. He believed that only a tiny
elite has the capacity to rule. He would
really wrestle for a long time if we had
time traveling Petrarch to wrap his head
around democracy as a functional system.
He really thought in oligarchic terms.
Um but he would see the wonders we've
created and especially the fact that we
can treat the Black Death and he would
weep for joy seeing that. He did not
create a world that went as he wanted,
but he created a world that went well.
And we have many examples of that,
right? Trains and bicycles come in and
we get feminism.
Because it's easier for people,
especially women, to move freely and
independently. They can organize, they
can mobilize. We get suffragettes.
Did the inventor of the train intend for
there to be women's liberation?
No. Did it go the way he imagined? No.
Did it go well? Yes.
So, last episode, Jane Street introduced
a puzzle where they backdoored various
LLMs and asked people to figure out what
the secret trigger phrases were. Since
then, they've received a bunch of
submissions.
Unfortunately, none of them have solved
the problem. And so, I asked Jane
Street, "Look, we got to give people
some kind of clue or some kind of hint,
something to get them on the right
track."
And Jane Street said, "We'd love to, but
we can't because we don't know how to
find the solution either." So, you've
got a puzzle in front of you that some
of the smartest people in the world
aren't sure how to solve. And they're
the ones who made it. So, it'd be pretty
insane if you could figure it out.
Beyond the writing rights, Jane Street
is offering $50,000 to the top write-ups
and attempts. Separately, Jane Street is
currently accepting applications for
their summer ML internships in New York,
London, and Hong Kong. You'll be paired
with mentors and you'll be contributing
to real ML projects. So, go to
janestreet.com/twmcast
to check out the puzzle and the
internship. It's important, I think
here, to zoom in a little bit on
Florence's own government system and how
and why it's weird in order to
understand what rank Machiavelli
actually holds in it.
>> Yeah. Uh so,
all of these republics, except Florence,
are modeled on ancient Rome. And the
ancient Roman model was an oligarchic
republic in which within the city there
are certain noble families, usually
founding families, who made the city in
the first place, who they are the
senatorial families. Hereditarily, when
they come of age, they automatically,
the men of the family are in the Senate.
From among them are elected the consuls
or or
high senators or if there's a head of
state, the head of state. And so, you
have a small slice of the population
that are fully enfranchised members of
the republic who rule over the commoner
majority. That is how Venice works. That
is how Genoa works. That is how Bologna
and Siena, for the most part, work.
That's how the Swiss Republic works.
That's how all of these republics work.
Florence was like that for quite a
while, but
when republics fell, they usually fell
to noble families who are the foremost,
the strongest, who are the military
class, right? If you're a military
leader in this period, you have to have
noble blood. No soldier is going to
follow a commander who doesn't have
noble blood. That would be weird.
And um those threats to the independence
of the republic almost always came from
the nobility. And after one particular
near miss in which the city was nearly
taken over, they decided to get rid of
the nobility of Florence. And they
massacred most of them and cut their
heads off and put them on pikes and
burned their houses down and raked salt
into the earth and had a party on their
graves, the way you do in the period
when you're getting rid of a class of
people. There were a few noble families
that they really liked who had not been
part of negative stuff, who they instead
allowed to officially renounce their
nobility. And they renounced their
nobility and changed their names and
declared themselves commoners. And they
set up a commoner republic. So, what
that meant was the Senate consisted of
members of merchant guilds. A member of
a merchant guild here means the owners
of workshops. Not the guy who sits at
the loom weaving, but the guy who owns
the warehouse full of looms where the
workers are working. The head of the
sculpture works, the head of the
architectural firm, not the bricklayers
who are actually laying the bricks. So,
we're talking about the economic
bourgeoisie is an anachronistic word,
but we're talking about the owners of
the means of production. Um, but who are
themselves commoners. So, they are very
wealthy, but from the point of view of
the diplomatic corps of any other
society where all of the ruling people
and all of their envoys and all of their
ambassadors are noble-blooded. If you're
an ambassador, you're automatically
noble-blooded. Nobody's going to take an
ambassador seriously who isn't
noble-blooded, right? Um, uh, from the
perspective of every other polity in the
world, the rulers of Florence are the
rank of their valet, right? Uh, there is
no nobility left in the city. In fact,
Florence can't
uh, run its own armies or head its own
police. Uh, because you're not going to
surrender if you're told to surrender in
the name of some guy who doesn't have a
coat of arms, right? That would be
weird. So, they actually have to hire a
nobleman to come to the city
uh, and be their chief of police to
arrest people in the name of the Holy
Roman Emperor. Uh,
and one at a time they'll invite uh,
skilled military commander nobleman.
He'll come to the city. He'll be
podesta. He'll live in the um,
palace, which is also the prison. He'll
arrest people. He'll enforce the law.
Uh, they will pay him handsomely at the
end of the year, escort escort him to
the gates, and then banish him from the
city for life on pain of death, so that
he cannot return and make use of the
power that he had in the city to try to
take over. So, they're very very wary of
any noble nobleman. And they've set up a
really weird republic, weird from the
perspective of everyone around them, in
which a bunch of merchants are trying to
share power by being lottery into the
Senate. And so, you put names in a bag,
you examine all of the merchant members
of guilds, you choose which ones are,
you know, fit to serve, meaning not ill
and dying, not insane, not so deeply in
debt that they could be manipulated by
the people who they owe money to. Uh
their names go in a bag, you choose nine
guys at random, they rule the city,
uh they are put in a palace where they
rule the city from that tower. They're
actually locked in the tower for the
duration of their time in office,
because if they left the tower they
could be bribed or kidnapped. And they
ruled the city for 2 months or 3 months.
Uh and then at the end they are thanked
for their service and escorted out, and
then the different nine guys share power
for the next 3 months. Uh a power
sharing that is designed to be tyrant
proof, because you need consensus of
like nine randomly selected guys to um
uh decide to do anything. Oh, it's not
even a majority vote, it's consensus.
>> It's consensus. Okay. So, and can I ask
how
the previously you're you're describing
kill the nobles, salt the earth, I'm
almost thinking early communist, but
then you say, well, no, it's the heads
of the merchant uh guilds who are in
charge.
>> Right. And so, I want to understand why
merchants, entrepreneurs have
notable status in Florence. What is it
about the culture that makes it so? And
also, the Medici, the most powerful
people, their their job is usury, right?
It's like
>> it's important to remember they were
nobody when this set up. Right.
>> They were
uh they were a minor important family.
>> the culture is getting started where
somebody like that could be respected.
So, how does that happen? So, an
important part of it is when you have a
merchant capital,
everybody works for somebody who works
for somebody who works for the boss.
>> Mhm. And, you know, if you are a major
merchant in Florence, you're importing
and exporting wool to and from all
across Europe. You have employees all
across Europe. You're buying mass bulk
wool from England, importing it to
Florence to use olive oil that you've
bought from Naples to process into
high-quality wool, which you're then
exporting to Germany and France. You are
a very interconnected businessman. You
have a lot of contacts. You have a lot
of clout. Uh and the employees who work
for you look to you for their safety net
as well as their political
representation. So, we're very
accustomed in the modern period to
thinking of government as being our big
safety net. And if we wonder who is
going to fund the hospitals,
uh whose job is it to take care of
orphans, we think government or maybe
the church. But in this period, if
you're killed and you leave orphans
behind, it is your employer whose duty
it is to take care of them. Um if you
are injured and can no longer work, it
is your employer who will support you
for the rest of your life while you are
disabled and find you work that you can
do with that disability. A huge portion
of the safety net is your employer. Are
you in trouble with the law? Your
employer will survive supply your
defense attorney. And your employer will
supply the persuasive note to the judge
that they would very much appreciate if
their person got off. This is the system
known as the patronage system and it
existed in ancient Rome. It exists and
saturates the medieval and the
Renaissance worlds in which everyone is
in a very interconnected hierarchy. So,
if you're a brewer and your son gets in
a barroom brawl and punches somebody out
and the person's nose breaks and they
die in the brawl and your son is
suddenly in trouble and you say, "Oh no,
I don't want my son to be executed."
You turn to your landlord. Your landlord
turns to his landlord.
Uh they turn to one of these major
families and these major families are
massive landowners that own dozens of
apartments within the city. Hundreds or
thousands of people work for them. And
so it makes sense to everyone to be
represented that way like having a
council of the CEOs of all of the
organizations that employees work for
when your
corporation also supplies your social
safety net and you see your
representation there. Mhm. It's also a
world that's used to thinking in terms
of hierarchy and very unused to thinking
about real democracy and that really
doesn't have any confidence in what we
would recognize as democracy. We talk
about these republics and we're very
excited by the fact that they give more
power to the people than a monarchy
does. But they're still incredibly
narrow oligarchic republics. So one
thing when we read Machiavelli, he talks
a lot about the popolo, right? Which we
translate as the people. And he talks
about how important it is that the
popolo are respected and the popolo have
a voice and that the popolo are armed
and you show the government shows
respect for the people by allowing the
people to be armed. We read this and
we're like, "Yeah, this feels really
familiar. This feels like documents of
the founding of the US where we're
respecting and arming and trusting the
people." Popolo meant the top 4%
economically of the population, the
members of the merchant merchant guilds.
That's the popolo. He's talking about a
narrow slice oligarchy being heard, a
narrow slice oligarchy being respected.
We didn't realize that in the 19th
century when we were excitedly
translating The Prince and reading it as
quasi-democratic.
Uh we now have read more documents of
the period and realize how people use
these words.
Okay, so Florence in this period goes
through like five different forms of
government. So it's this republic of
nine dudes in a tower as you were saying
before 1434 and Well, then there's a
gradual takeover, right? There's a
gradual what we could call regulatory
capture. But, an interesting detail
about Florence, even as the Medici take
over, is that the Medici know the people
of Florence are very deeply invested in
this republic and very deeply invested
in its institutions. And we have to
therefore respect those institutions and
proclaim respect for those institutions.
So, we're going to sustain people in the
named offices that there used to be. And
we're going to continue to let the
guilds be important and have important
offices. And we're going to continue to
if there was a mandatory outfit that
people wore who worked in the republic,
which there was, the garment thing over
there in the corner is an underway Lucco
Fiorentino. This was the garment you
were mandated by law to wear if you held
office in the Florentine Republic. To
us, we look at it and we're like, it's a
long red robe, it looks very
Renaissance. To them, it looked like a
toga.
Cuz of the way it was draped. They
thought of this as a toga. They're cos
playing the Roman Republic.
And wearing a Florentine toga while in
office was something that you did to
represent your fealty to Cicero and
Republican values. And the dukes made
their men continue to wear these. In
fact, the first duke, Cosimo I,
would wear one to costume balls as if in
his heart he longed to not have not
dress like a duke, but to dress in a
toga like a Republican. It's actually
doubly ironic because
when
the Roman Republic turns into a Roman
Empire, they still have the Senate, they
still have all these old institutions
that even though it's no longer a
republic.
>> Yeah, the Roman Senate keeps meeting
until 1200 AD.
>> Right. So, it it's sort of doubly ironic
that they are they are doing the same
thing, but in fact in the in the 1500s.
>> And it means that more rights are
granted to the people of Florence than
to other cities that felt a monarchies
at similar points.
Uh because the monarchs of Florence know
they have to be careful. And they have
to respect rights to a certain amount
and they can't run roughshod over them.
Uh there's a really cool building that I
love um
in Florence. It's if you've been there,
there's the famous bridge, the Ponte
Vecchio, which has the little jeweler
shops all along it. And when you get to
the end of it, there's this funny
uh over the head corridor, the Vasari
corridor as we call it, which was built
by the Dukes of Florence to connect the
old city palace where the Senate used to
meet, where they had to have their seat
of power, to their new palace across the
river, which was much bigger, where they
could have grand balls and things that
Dukes need to have. And because they're
so terrified of being assassinated by
their own people, they built this
overhead walkway that goes from one end
of the city to the other so that they
could walk in safety without being
assassinated, right? This is a sign of a
weak Duke. But also, when he was
building it, it's going across the roofs
and sometimes blasting off the second
stories of different people's houses.
And most people, when His Grace the Duke
says, "I'm going to blast the top story
off your house," would say, "Yes, Your
Grace, please continue." Cuz there are
literally severed heads of people who
resisted still rotting on spikes in
front of the Palazzo Vecchio. Uh but
they get to this one point where there's
an old tower, a very old tower, a
500-year-old tower. And this belongs to
I think it's the Minelli family, who are
descended from peers of Julius Caesar
and can trace their genealogy all the
way back to an old Roman gens. And when
the Duke says, "We want to top knock the
top off your tower," they say, "No. This
is our tower. This tower has been ours
since before the Medici existed as a
named family. You may not knock the top
off." And the Duke
does not knock the top off, and the
corridor goes around in this awkward
square
uh around that tower because he knows
that if he violates something as
traditional and core to the civilization
as the property rights of somebody who
has owned something for a long time,
there will be rebellion, there will be
civil war, there will be dissent, there
will be resistance.
These are monarchs who know that they
are weak and are therefore careful and
therefore more rights like property
rights exist. Meanwhile, across the
river in Ferrara, Duke Alfonso d'Este of
Ferrara used to wander around Ferrara
buck naked with a sword in one hand and
his dick in the other to show off that
nobody would ever possibly try to harm a
Duke d'Este. And he and his siblings
used to do things like if you they liked
a musician, kidnap them and lock them in
a tower so that nobody else could hear
them. Or if they wanted each other's
musician, send goons to kidnap each
other's musicians. They also used to
recreationally murder each other's
servants when the siblings were tiffing
with each other.
That is what you do when you don't fear
your people and when you feel confident
in power, right? And so they are much
closer to tyrants
than the Medici are ever able to be even
after the republic falls. And that's
what's so neat, right? Because the
resistance failed if we're looking at it
in black and white. The republic fell.
There wasn't a republic anymore.
There was a duke. He took over those The
old system was gone.
But because the republic fought so hard
and because the people really believed
in it, the people had a lot more rights
and the tyrant was a lot less tyrannical
because there had been that fight. It's
a great example of how even when
resistance loses, resistance wins. Yeah,
I I think there's actually an
interesting parallel to today where
not to be too on the nose, but like
>> [laughter]
>> sometimes you would debate like what is
the odds that America becomes a sort of
a Putinist kind of country within a
couple of decades and I think the odds
are actually quite low, just because
even though constitutionally or at least
in precedent, the president is very
powerful, the Republican expectation is
so strong that that the amount of
resistance that is faced, even when you
successfully do something,
>> Right. demotivates the next generation.
>> Yeah. The only thing that makes
resistance weak in the US is when people
feel as if partial victory is failure.
Mhm. Right? And reme- remembering
moments like how Florence's resistance
all the way to the end meant that there
was more liberty for the next several
centuries even under the tyrant.
>> Yeah. Is what we need to remind
ourselves that actually partial victory
is an important thing. And even if the
worst were to happen and there were to
be tyranny, Yeah.
>> that tyranny would be so much weaker
because there was a lot of resistance
and traditions of resistance and
structures would develop that would
continue to exist. Yeah. Um I I think
you should discuss the um I think you
should discuss the fact that the Medicis
are the bankers for the papacy. What
what do you I mean, why is that
necessary and how they were able to make
money off of that from the interest on
the float? So, when Cosimo de Medici
swings the contract as banker for the
Pope, it's important to remember that
when you can't wire transfer money,
you know, in the pre-modern world,
collecting taxes is very difficult and
complicated system. It is generally done
by the centralizing power that has the
right to tax delegating somebody local
who knows. So, if you're in a town, that
there'll be a local tax collector. It's
his job to go around to everybody and
collect taxes and then send a portion of
those taxes home to the central power
and keep a remainder to pay himself.
The central power will say, "We expect x
amount of taxes from this area." And
when you hear about wicked tax
collectors, wahaha, uh it's because if
you are told, "We want 10,000 florins
worth of tax from this town," but you
extract 15, you can keep the other five
because the 10 is what you need to send
to the central. So, the more you
extract, the more you get paid. Um this
delegate system in which there's a local
tax collector and even a more local tax
collector below him who might collect
tax from a particular village, um means
that you depend a lot upon the person
whose job it is to collect your taxes.
So, when Cosimo is papal banker, he is
the person who is collecting and
channeling the money from every church
in Christendom when everybody puts a
coin into a collection box or pilgrims
come and put money, all of the wealth
that's supposed to flow back to the
papacy is actually flowing to Cosimo.
Cosimo is passing it on to the papacy
after taking a cut. So, that is a lot of
money moving quickly. It is also a lot
of ability to make contracts and
contacts. We all know how important
networking is. And he rises in
prominence from a banker to somebody who
has enough money to effectively take
over his state via manipulating the guys
out of a bag system. And so, to discuss
that again briefly, uh if you have a
system where you lottery people, uh
sortition is the technical term for it.
This is a very old form of government.
Even ancient Athens uses it. It actually
works really well. Uh but like any
institution, it is corruptible. And in
the same way that you can corrupt a
voting by bribing people or manipulating
the machines or manipulating voters, you
can also corrupt sortition uh by bribing
the people who pull names out of the bag
or by the simpler mechanism which Cosimo
uses first of if you're a giant bigwig
in the city and you employ a third of
the people in the city and a third of
the people in the city are on your
payroll. And nine guys at random are
chosen out of a bag. Three of them are
going to be your guys just
statistically.
And so, if you tell all your guys, I
want this policy, this policy, and this
policy. And if you have questions, send
for me and I'll tell you what to do.
>> [sighs]
>> When the plurality on a random council
all have a plan and it's your plan, you
effectively control the city.
And so, in that way
the Medici effectively control this
lottery system because they've
guaranteed that the plurality in a
situation that doesn't have a majority
will always be them. Yeah. But of course
there's a chance to that. And in 15,
sorry, in 1432,
30 1430 and 1432, uh Cosimo has bad
luck. And the lottery draws a lot of
people who dislike him and doesn't draw
any of his guys. And they immediately
declare him a traitor to the state and
arrest him and lock him in a tower.
And he bribes his way out. And he offers
the equivalent of about three,
$300,000 to the guard outside the cell
and $700,000 to the, um,
uh, captain of the guard to smuggle him
out of the tower. And he wrote in a
letter later that they were the two most
foolish men he'd ever met because he was
Cosimo de Medici. He would happily have
paid them tens of millions of dollars to
let him out of there, but they weren't
ambitious enough to think to ask for
more than a few hundred thousand. Um, so
he escapes and then the next election,
by gum, happened to elect entirely
people who just loved Cosimo and they
invited him back to the city in triumph
and they declared him father of the
fatherland and they arrested and
persecuted all of his enemies who turned
out to be guilty of tax evasion and all
sorts of other things. And that was the
moment that his grip tightened and he's
like, "I'm going to stop simply
controlling a plurality and I'm going to
start bribing the people who actually
run the elections." Uh, and his famous
quote about this is, "It is dangerous to
be rich and not powerful."
And that you need the power to defend
yourself in a situation like King of the
Mountain where when you're on top
everyone will try to knock you down.
Yeah. This is the system into which
Machiavelli, right, is born.
Uh, in which his family has worked for
the Medici family for generations. He
grows up expecting to work for the
Medici family. Um, but
the problem with heredity is that
sometimes you get a weak link.
And in the moment that Machiavelli is in
his early 20s coming of age about to
work in in government for the first
time, a government in which he himself
is not in fact even fully enfranchised.
That's one of the fascinating things
about the degree of his patriotism.
You weren't allowed to serve in
government office fully the the elected
lottery offices if your family was deep
in debt. And his grandfather had a lot
of unpaid tax debt. So he worked his
whole life for a government of which he
was not even quite a full citizen. Which
is again deep love of your country, but
also shows even people who could not be
in office deeply loved and cared about
this republic. And that important
liberty that they felt they had being
ruled by the 5% instead of being ruled
by one dictator. And to us that isn't a
very big difference, right? They're
still both not democracy. We would say
they're both not liberty in the sense
that we want liberty. But it's an inch
more liberty than monarchy. And even
that small amount of liberty people
loved it. People were willing to fight
for it. People were willing to go to the
streets and wave their banners and say
libertas
for the republic and and because they
were investing in it and Machiavelli
observes they sustained it.
But eventually one particular Medici,
I'm not saying names because they all
have the same names over and over and
it's really confusing. So it's easier
without names. One particular Medici
uh comes to power quite
young and weak. He's basically 20 when
he's suddenly in charge of a very
particular and precarious republic. And
right then the French are invading Italy
and he's scared and he botches the
diplomacy with France and falls into
disrepute and the city takes the
opportunity to kick him out. The
subsequent regimes
which are an independent republic again
are the ones for which Machiavelli
works. He was part of the regime that
ruled while they were in exile. When
they returned, they viewed him as an
enemy.
Um he didn't actively organize to resist
them, but his name was found on a list
of potential people that an
anti-Medicean resistance movement had
intended to recruit.
Uh he is arrested, tortured, exiled. And
in exile writes The Prince, but
dedicates it to the very family that
exiled him because they now control
Florence. And
he will only work for Florence. He
doesn't want his manual of here are the
great secrets of statecraft to be in the
hands of anybody but his homeland, so
that it will defend his homeland. When
Florence exiles you, they tell you go to
X place and wait. And if you're good,
we'll invite you back. And Florence has
been doing this for ages because
Florence actually used it this as the
core of its diplomatic core, right? When
you have no nobility, you can't have
ambassadors in the full-on noble
ambassador sense. There's nobody in the
city of sufficient rank to go talk to
the kings who are, you know, and and
have played chess with the sultan and
all of these things that you have to do
to be a proper ambassador.
So, what Florence did instead is that
they would exile people and say, "Okay,
we're exiling you. You go to Bruges.
Be our contact in Bruges. You go to
London. Be our contact in London. Be
good. Send us letters informing us
what's going on. When we have diplomatic
needs to talk to the king, we're going
to send letters to you and you're going
to forward them. And if you're good, you
get to come back."
So, being in exile is kind of being on
probation, but also being entrusted with
state stuff.
That's not quite what they did with
Machiavelli. With Machiavelli, they
banished him to
a hamlet in the middle of the Tuscan
countryside near nothing important and
said, "Go sit in the country and rot.
And if you're good, we'll invite you
back." What they expect, what everyone
expects, is that Machiavelli will break
that promise and leave.
Because he's a well-known statesman and
a scholar and a playwright and a
historian. And there are dozens of
cardinals in Rome and other cities that
would love to employ him. Um
the kings of England love employing
Florentines to work for them as
secretaries. Kings of Naples love
employing Florentines to work for them
as secretaries. He might go get a job
tutoring the daughters of the Duke of
Milan uh the way Francesco Filelfo did
when he was kicked out of Florence for
opposing the Medici. There are lots of
places that it's expected
an exiled Florentine intellectual will
go where he will have the ear of power
and he will be able to exert influence.
He will be a mover and shaker at the
court of Milan or the court of Naples or
the court of uh of England. Uh instead,
when they say to Machiavelli, "Sit in
the country and rot." This is a test. He
passes the test and sits in the country
faithfully and rots.
Uh and if he had wanted to go be an
intellectual power broker, the correct
move is to run off to Rome, right? And
say, "I will give up the chance to go
home the way Dante did. Uh but I will be
a Florentine in exile and I will write
important things and I will live at the
house of wealthy men who will support me
and take me in and give me the ear of
power and I will exert my influence in
that way." He does not do that. He stays
in the country and he rots and he
continues writing letters home saying,
"I will serve you or nothing. Bring me
home to serve my country." That is a
weird thing to do, right? And not normal
for the many other Florentine
intellectuals who experience similar
similar banishments in the same period.
How do we know that he wasn't just
trying to get back into power?
>> I mean, the answer is you write you read
his personal letters and you read the
way he talks about love of his country
and you read the way he talks to his
friends. You read the letters he wrote
when he discusses writing The Prince.
Uh and you read the comments he
exchanges with the other friends that he
uh shared it with. Um you know, his
other works, his comic play, which was a
big hit, his history of Florence, which
was well known at the time. Those he
published and circulated. The Prince he
kept in very close private circles,
circulating it only with trusted
intimate friends, and then the copy that
he sends in to Florence. And yes, it's a
job application. Please bring me back. I
will work for you. I will be loyal. I
support my city more than any particular
iteration of my city. I support my
country more than any particular regime
or um
uh group that might be in power.
Whatever is in power in my city, I will
be faithful to it. Uh you see him
expressing that in lots of different
ways. And when in the prince he says you
can do and should do all of these
different ruthless things to keep power,
we have to remember that the end
justifies the means when the end is the
survival of your country.
Uh it's not the end in general justifies
the means. But Machiavelli feels very
strongly that regime changes bring civil
violence, civil violence sheds blood.
And he has seen the streets of his city
run with blood before.
Uh he thinks that even life under a
tyrant
uh is better than
life
in a civil war, which is usually not
life at all.
Uh the massacre of the people that is
likely and external conquest that is
likely as a result of another regime
change. So, he says, "Don't push for a
regime change, even if the regime is
tyrannical. More people will survive by
sticking with the tyrant than by
changing the regime."
Okay, so a few weeks ago I gave Open
Claw a Mercury debit card, and I set a
few hundred dollar limit, and I asked it
to plan a date for me. And here's what
happened.
What? You're flying with Seaplane
Adventures out of Mill Valley? 30-minute
flight over the Bay, Alcatraz, Golden
Gate Bridge, the whole thing. Takes off
and lands on the water. I showed up to
my date on Saturday half expecting the
booking not to exist. But thankfully,
everything was sorted. Open Claw has
successfully made the reservation, used
its card to pay for the full thing, and
it even emailed a receipt to Mercury for
proper bookkeeping. I doubt this is the
use case that Mercury had in mind when
they made the card system, but the
control that they gave me over spend
limits and permissions is what made this
experiment work. I just never worried
about the agent going rogue and
bankrupting me. This flexibility is why
I use Mercury for both my business and
personal banking. If you're already a
business user, personal accounts are
free and well worth using. Check out the
show notes for specific terms and
conditions, and head to
mercury.com/personal
to learn more. Mercury is a fintech
company, not an FDIC insured bank.
Banking services provided through Choice
Financial Group and Column N.A. Members
FDIC.
I want to talk about the printing press.
So, one thing I didn't realize before
reading your book is that
not only does Gutenberg go bankrupt
after making the most significant
invention of a millennia, but his
apprentices also go bankrupt.
Um, and this is at a time when people
like Cosimo are willing to pay on the
order of hundreds of thousands of
dollars per book. And so, the guy who
invents a way to make this way cheaper,
how how is this possible? So, the
problem is printed books are
mass-produced commodity in a world that
does not have distribution networks for
mass-produced commodities, right? Mass
production is incredibly rare in this
period. Coins are mass-produced, but
that's really about it. Almost
everything is artisanally produced.
When you have a mass-produced product,
you need a distribution mechanism before
you can sell it. The great example is
technically e-books existed the first
time anyone typed a book on a computer,
right? Meaning certainly in the 1970s
there was such a thing as an e-book, but
there was no market for e-books until
the Kindle came out and made there be a
commodity way to buy and sell e-books.
Then the e-book industry came into
existence. So, e-book as commodity is
several decades younger than e-book
technically existing, right? In the same
way, um,
you're Gutenberg, you have figured out
how to produce 300 copies of a book for
the cost of one copy of a book. You do
so. You print your Bible. You have 300
Bibles. You sell seven of them to the
seven people in your small landlocked
German town who are legally allowed to
read the Bible in a period in which only
priests are allowed to read the Bible.
Congratulations, Mr. Gutenberg. You have
Bibles and you can't sell them and you
go bankrupt. There has to be a
distribution mechanism for books to find
their market cuz there are certainly 300
people in Europe that want this, but
there are not 300 people in one location
where it's being produced. So, Gutenberg
goes bankrupts. The bank seizes his
press. They try to go into the business.
The bank goes bankrupt. This is so much
overhead. Uh, you you spend hundreds of
thousands of dollars on the production
cost of the books and then you get
nothing back. Um, Gutenberg's
apprentices build presses. They go
bankrupt. They flee their debts and flee
the country and leave Germany, go to
Venice.
And Venice is the airport hub of the
Mediterranean. Venice is where you
change boats. And so, if you're sailing
from A to B, you go to Venice, you
change boats, you get to the next place.
The hub system has always worked well.
So, if you're printing in Venice, you
print 300 Bibles, you give 10 Bibles to
each of 30 ships captains going to 30
different cities.
They can sell them. And the first
economically sustainable circulation of
print is enabled by the hub system. Then
book fairs come into existence in which
printers will spend all year printing a
a book. They go with 1,000 copies of
their book to a book fair where there
are 1,000 other printers. They all trade
and then they go home to their town with
five copies each of 200 books instead of
1,000 copies of one book and then they
sell them in book shops. So, things like
the Frankfurt Book Fair, which still
exists today, developed as the
distribution mechanism. So, there's a
slow growth and in slow saturation. And
that's really cool because one of the
things I think people think is unique
about our present information revolution
is that we're living in this sequence of
successive information revolutions,
right? We had the computer, the computer
was exciting, and then we had the
personal computer, and then we had the
internet, and we had the cell phone, and
then we had social media, and now we
have different social media networks
coming in successively causing crises
one after the other, and then we have
LLMs and other applications of machine
learning and gen AI, right? And it's
easy to think of each of these as
different
tech revolutions, as if we've just had
10 tech revolutions in a row. But
really, they are all deeper penetration
of one tech revolution, the computer
revolution, the development of the
computer. These are all applications of
computers. And so, in the same way, the
printing press comes in in 1450, and it
isn't done shaping the world instantly.
The printing press comes in in 1450. It
takes 40 years to even be economically
sustainable. It's not until the 1490s
that printers are making money. And
then, in the 1510s, it's time for
pamphlets and pamphlet distribution. And
now, there's news, and news is suddenly
done by print, and that's
a revolution on the same scale as the
difference between computers and cell
phones. And we get the Arab Spring, or
rather, we get the Reformation,
which is enabled by pamphlets in exactly
the same way that the Arab Spring is
enabled by cell phones. Then, we get the
newspaper,
another new application of the same
technology that follows like social
media.
It's one information revolution having
multiple successive revolutionary
applications as it disseminates and
eventually saturates. And it moves on a
time scale quite similar to the time
scale on which the digital one is
happening as well, so that print keeps
hitting Europe with successive
revolutions for 150 years.
And every couple decades, there'll be a
new bang, or sometimes every decade,
there'll be a new suddenly it's possible
to get a printed pamphlet from
Wittenberg to London in 17 days. Oh my
god, we can coordinate our resistance
movement against the Catholics. Boom.
Uh the Reformation happens. That wasn't
possible even a decade earlier when you
could took months to get a pamphlet from
one end of Europe to the other. So,
it's best to think of these very much in
parallel, the print revolution and the
digital revolution, as one big
technological change in information that
then has successive applications as that
one technology finds new forms and
disseminates more deeply and keeps
having consequences over decades, but
it's not multiple separate revolutions.
It's one ongoing information revolution.
Do you see us um
maybe other areas also have this and
I just haven't read the books about
them, but from your book, I'm just like,
oh, history just seems to be happening
really, really fast and seems to have
sped up, especially religious and
political history. So,
obviously the things happening in Italy,
but even aside from that, Martin Luther,
Reformation, and then then just 20 years
later,
>> Yeah.
England splits off from
from the Catholic Church, which is like
unprecedented in 2 million years.
>> a bunch of tumults that flap flap flap
flap flap so that every decade feels
different. Yeah, and you know, you're
here you are in 1506
being nostalgic for how the world was
completely different in 1490. And you're
like, that's pretty fast. And here we
are in 2026 often feeling nostalgic for
how things were in the year 2000, right?
>> Right. And so is it fair to trace that
back to the printing press or its
offshoots or is it just independent?
It's more that history has always moved
fast,
but when we teach it in high school,
we're trying to move over large chunks
of time quickly, and so we pretend that
it moved slowly. We have this lie that
there were long periods of stagnation.
But you can zoom in anywhere and you're
going to find every decade feels
different, and people in the 1320s are
nostalgic for people in the 13 aughts,
right? And it's always felt like history
was moving very quickly, and things
rose, and things fell. It's the lies we
tell ourselves in history books written
in the 19th century that are trying to
group all of these things together and
make modernity special. They confuse us
about this. So, like I'm working on a
paper right now about the video game
Civ, right? Civ is the number one
teacher of history in the world, right?
And it has shipped 70 million copies,
and 65% of people on Earth who have
technology play video games, right? Uh
Civ is the number one teacher of
history, bar none, since 1991. And what
does Civ tell you? Civ tells you that in
antiquity, a turn is 50 years, and then
in the Middle Ages, a turn is 25 years,
and then once you get into Industrial
Revolution, a turn is 10 years, and then
5 years, and in modernity, a turn is
just 1 year, because in 1 year as much
happens now as happened in 50 years in
antiquity. And that lie is also what our
textbooks tell us, but it doesn't matter
where we zoom in. Anytime I go to a talk
where any historian is zooming in on any
decade in any time and place, it always
feels like it's moving as fast as our
present is moving. Right. I I I I I
guess the difference is that
technologically, we know that they
weren't moving as fast.
>> Technologically, they were moving fast.
We just don't care about those
technologies anymore. That's
interesting.
>> [laughter]
>> They were constantly inventing like all
sorts of things. We just take them for
granted, right? The invention of chairs
with backs, the invention of scissors,
the invention of improved metallurgy so
that steel could do things steel
couldn't do before. There was always
technological change happening. I'm in
the middle of reading an amazing book
about um when you look at the paintings
of Raphael and the few paintings we have
by Michelangelo, the colors look like
they're really glowing.
>> Yeah. It's like like gemstones. Uh how
did that happen when you compare them to
paintings from just 100 years earlier
where somehow the colors are flatter.
I'm not talking about the anatomy being
more realistic, that's separate, but the
colors are flatter. And the answer is
there was a sequence of revolutionary
adaptations in how to process oil and
how to process colors and how to mix
them together. And then those were used
to create fake gemstones and there was a
major industrial leap forward in the
fake gemstone industry. And then people
who are making picture frames realized
they could use the same techniques from
the fake gemstones to make fake gold uh
by painting uh yellow over the surface
of tin foil. And then those were used by
artists who were like, "Wait, I want to
make things that look like they glow
like fake gemstones." So that there were
11 major technical revolutions over the
course of 120 years
that led to those colors changing.
Yeah, uh but but the then there's so
obviously progress has been happening in
individual fields over time, but this
macroscopic view, there's a reason that
people uh
this is a big part of your book, but
living in the 14th century would say,
"Look, the best time to be alive was
when the Romans were around and since
then it's just been the Dark Ages."
>> Yeah. And if they stood in relation to
the Roman Empire as we stand to them,
we would obviously notice that hey, the
world is like so much there's like so
much so much progress since then. So
um
yeah, clearly seems like the pace was
>> Yeah, I mean it's it's hard to figure
out like when we when are we lying and
when are we right where we say the pace
picked up?
And one thing that makes the pace pick
up in modern day is simply the
population grew and grew and grew and is
now much much larger, right? And the
majority of people who ever lived in the
entire history of since humans have been
humans and not hominids have lived in
the last 200 years because the
population became massive. How did the
population become massive? Our
agriculture and our hygiene Right.
enabled it. Had our agriculture and our
hygiene improve, half of that is
continuing to on the artisanal level to
invent new things in the same way that
the artists invented better colors, uh
agricultural workers invented better
technologies and agriculture was
constantly improving. In the other,
though, you're correct that with the
arrival of the systematic scientific
method
in just after 1600, there is a
deliberate societal desire to create
intentional anthropogenic progress.
So, I'll zoom in on the arguments made
in 1600, then I'll zoom out and unpack
them. Um but in 1600, the idea is
history up until now has been sort of
unsystematic and people have discovered
things kind of at random, but
uh we can create
a method in which we observe the world
and use
inductive reasoning to figure things out
from those observations to create
systematic descriptions of the secret
motions that underlie nature and from
that work out technologies that are good
and useful for humankind. If, as we make
our observations of nature, we publish
them and share them with each other,
we can create a community of scientists
that will share all of these discoveries
with each other
and with the world and therefore benefit
it. This is where, when I'm doing this
in the classroom, I deliberately provoke
and shock my students with the fun
claim, "Leonardo da Vinci was not a
scientist."
What I mean by that is that to be a
scientist is to publish your results and
share them with a community of other
scientists so that they can test them,
so that the whole human civilization
progresses a little bit, right? And when
my friends who are chemists or my
friends who are particle physicists
discover something, the next goal is to
share that discovery with everyone, so
everyone's knowledge advances. What does
Leonardo do? He writes everything he
discovers down in coded mirror writing,
so that nobody but him can possibly use
it. And he refuses to share even with
his students and assistants the secrets
of what he's doing, because Leonardo
does want to contribute to human
progress. Leonardo wants to make unique
masterpieces so that hundreds of years
later people will see them and marvel
and say, "How did he do it? No one else
has ever been able to replicate that
method." So that he would be marveled at
by the future exactly the way he and his
peers marveled at the works of the
ancients. And they would look at
something like the Colosseum or the
Pantheon in Rome with its enormous dome
and they say, "Oh, how did they do it?
If only we could work that out, we could
work make one and then make sure no one
else could." Brunelleschi, who built
Florence's famous beautiful dome,
deliberately burned all of his notes and
schematics so that nobody else would be
able to replicate his work. That is an
inventor and it is an engineer, but in
the sense of a community of scientists,
this is not a servant of human progress.
This is actually a saboteur of human
progress if anything, who deliberately
makes progress and then tries to cut it
off at that point so that no one else
can be his peer. So that is what you did
as a learned inventor in the 1400s and
in the 1500s, but as you get to 1600 the
suggestion is different. And here I'm
going to use Francis Bacon's gorgeous
simile of the three insects. So there
are three types of knowledge wielders,
says Bacon.
First there is the ant, who is the
encyclopedist, who gathers information
from all around the world and he learns
everything he can and he piles it up
into a great big pile and he makes an
anthill and he sits on top. And if he
has the biggest anthill, the biggest
pile of knowledge, then he's proud of
having made it. But all he does is
assemble it and have it, possess it.
Beautiful library, nothing comes from
it.
The second type is the system weaver,
the spider who spins elaborate webs of
beautiful intricate logical theory in
which you admire them and you can get
entranced and and ensnared in them
easily because they're so beautiful.
They're almost hypnotic. But there's
nothing real in them. They're all just
spun out of the body of the whole spider
himself, the theorist theorizing from
his own mind.
And the third kind, says Bacon, is the
honeybee
who gathering from among the fruits of
nature
processes what he gathers through the
organ of his own being to produce
something which is sweet and useful for
humankind.
And that is the scientist
who gathers from nature to produce
something sweet and useful for
humankind. And with this rhetorical call
and with Francis Bacon's portrait on the
title page, the English Academy of
Sciences is founded and starts
publishing and the standards switches
over from you are not a great achiever
because you built the dome. You are a
great achiever because you worked out
how it can be done and you shared that
sweet and useful thing with all of
humankind. Bacon says,
do this, if we make academies of
sciences, we can make sure that every
human generation lives in a better
condition than the past. We will have
better agriculture, fewer famines, we
will have refrigeration, we will have
chicken in winter, we will have all of
these things that we aspire to.
Uh if we collaborate, each generation's
experience will be better than the last.
Uh he says that to be a scientist is the
ultimate act of charity
because there is no greater act of
charity than to give a gift to every
human who will ever live after you.
So that is the rhetoric of what you
would feel was happening if you're alive
in the 1620s and 1630s and Galileo is
publishing his observations and
Descartes is publishing his systems and
they've just discovered the heart is a
pump.
Uh and that they were totally wrong
about the four humors theory and that
the blood circulates and they're trying
to figure out what it does. And they
have magnification and they can see
worlds of complex patterns on the wing
of a flea and it sounds like the whole
world is suddenly coming into view and
we're at the beginning of progress. Now,
if we zoom out, we would say there'd
been progress the whole time. People had
always been inventing things.
Agriculture in France was better in 1300
than it was in in 1000. Uh, plows got
better, seed got better, cabbages were
bred to be bigger, people worked out
better pots. There were always artisanal
inventors. And if I That's a lot of what
Bacon is observing. He worked in the
patent office as a young man and he
would see a carpenter come in to patent
I have invented a better
uh, chisel. I have invented a thing that
goes like this. I'm going to come patent
it. And he would realize that it was
workers and workmen and handicraftsmen
who were inventing the really useful
tools. He wanted to make this
systematic.
Uh, and so what we would say is there
was always anthropogenic progress. In
1630 they realized there is
anthropogenic progress. They think there
hasn't been. They think they're
beginning and that history up until this
point has been stagnant, but now it's
going to suddenly be full of invention
as for the first time there will be
deliberate anthropogenic progress.
Really, we would say there always was
and that it's accelerating and at this
point we realize it and articulate and
describe it. But you've probably seen
lots of graphs of history with the
hockey stick graph structure, right?
Where it's sort of flat for a long time
and then
swoops up. And they'll put that swoop
after the invention of the scientific
method. And it depends on what we're
graphing whether that swoop kind of is
appropriate. It also depends on how much
you zoom in or zoom out. Because it's
true, we do 150 years after Bacon get to
inventions that result in enormous
increases in population.
>> [gasps]
>> Would we have anyway, even if it hadn't
been systematized? Probably a bit later.
And we would have a slightly flatter
hockey stick. But we would still have
hockey sticked. Uh right, in the same
way that when you put mice on an island
without mice, they breed and they breed
and they breed and they breed and they
hockey stick. Uh humans would also have
hockey sticked. But would we have hockey
sticked later? Would we have hockey
sticked with more pain? Right, when mice
hockey stick they also starve to death
and eat each other. We haven't done that
yet. Go us. Uh was that science?
Probably.
Um and so there are a lot of factors to
it. So is it true that everything
accelerated after 1650?
In one or 1620 in one sense, yes. In
another sense, it's a continuation of a
curve that was already curving.
So I think you might have answered a
question I was about to ask, which is
uh the the book you recommend on your
website, The Renaissance in Italy. I for
keep forgetting the name of the author.
Guido Ruggiero, yes. Guido Ruggiero. In
some part he has this question, which is
look, in Italy
as you mentioned in Venice, they've
really scaled the printing press. As a
result, you have the metalworking for
fine typesetting, um separately for um
milling technology for watermills,
windmills is advanced. Um
you know, gears for watches. And so he
asks, why didn't Italy
uh have the Industrial Revolution?
Um and
I I wonder if you you you stand by the
answer you just gave or does it differ?
>> another is we cannot under underestimate
how much richer per square meter
Italy is than everywhere else. Italy is
the breadbasket and it's also the center
of big oil, which is to say big olive
oil, uh which is both fuel oil for light
and industrial oil for production as
well as cooking and eating oil. Um and
the other major major industry of the
period, which is big wool. If you're
already the center of big finance, big
wool, and big oil, Yeah. do you need an
industrial revolution?
You're already economically on top
through the power of agriculture.
It makes sense for it to have been a
sort of industrial backwater area. That
what was England producing? Crappy
quality wool.
Uh England was so aware that it couldn't
process wool into high quality without
masses of olive oil, which you couldn't
produce, that England just exported its
crude wool to Florence in order to have
Florence with its olive oil reserves
produce uh the fine quality. Think about
how a wool suit isn't itchy, but a wool
blanket often is. That wool suit isn't
itchy cuz lots of olive oil went into
the process of producing it, at least at
pre-modern tech levels. So, do you want
England to produce your itchy wool that
people will only play pay a small amount
for, or do you want to export it? Uh it
makes sense for it to have been
somewhere in industrially ambitious that
wasn't already economically on top to
have done it. So, that's one reason that
industrialization doesn't kindle in
Italy. Italy is agricultural land and
finance world. It doesn't feel like it
needs new industry.
Another factor is, you know, mining and
so on. This land is more valuable as a
farm than it is in a as a mine. You
don't want to rip it up,
>> Interesting.
>> right? Another is it's so subdivided
because those rich cities are still
mostly independent, whereas a
centralized crown in England is more
able to pass legislation to facilitate a
massive transformation. Uh no city
really wants to be the one where the
giant industrialization is happening.
It's awful for the city.
Um note that the industrialization of
the Industrial Revolution was mostly
outside of the wealthier centers of
England in the second-tier towns, right?
They grow massively into huge industrial
areas like Lancaster.
So,
uh those are a a bunch of reasons. But I
would have also thought that the
competitive nest between different
Italian
uh
city-states would have made it so that
like hey, if they get it they
if they get you know better textile
machines and whatever before you, it's
kind of a disaster cuz they're right
there. I mean, it's pretty clear this is
not going to sound plausible to anybody,
but it's true. We've been looking at
some documents recently which pretty
much confirm that they did figure out
how to make industrial looms in the
1400s and they didn't want to. They
wanted to make luxuriant artisanal
fabrics. Th- This by the way was another
interesting thing from the book which
was
the first printed books. They There was
like not as you just mentioned there's
there's not this market of
uh commodity
uh
things that are produced cheaply that
like the average person is going to be
like oh, if I can get this for $10.99,
I'll go buy it. And so they're trying to
make this thing look like it was
produced by artisanal luxury products.
>> Right. So, the first printed fonts look
like handwritten scripts and often have
a blank space to illuminate it so that
it looks just as fancy as the printed as
the as the manuscripts.
Existing benchmarks tend to seriously
over specify prompts. Take something
like WebArena. Tasks often spell out
every single step. For example, I will
arrive at the Pittsburgh airport soon.
Provide the nearest [music] Hyatt hotel
in the vicinity and then give me the
minimal driving distance to the
supermarket. But real users don't talk
like that. They'll say, [music] I'm
landing in Pittsburgh. Where do I get
groceries? Where should I stay? If we
want agents to generalize, they can't
rely on spoon-fed instructions. [music]
They have to handle under-specified
prompts and infer missing constraints
from the environment. Labelbox built a
dataset specifically for this. It's full
of ambiguous real-world scenarios with
incomplete prompts, realistic world
states, and clear evaluation criteria.
These scenarios reward correct
understanding, [music] not just
instruction following. For example, a
user tells a home agent, I'm going to
bed. Can you turn off all the lights? A
naive agent turns off all the lights in
the house. A stronger agent checks the
user's calendar, notices that there's a
game night in the living room, and only
turns off the bedroom lights. That
distinction is what today's benchmarks
miss. And this reading of context and
[music] inferring intent and acting
appropriately is what Labelbox's data
enables across domains. They can get you
scenarios tailor-made by their massive
network of subject matter experts. To
learn more, visit labelbox.com/labelbox.
[music]
One thing I wanted to ask you,
back to the printing press.
So, not only does printing get cheaper,
but around this time paper itself also
gets cheaper. So, like not just reading,
but writing gets cheaper. And do you as
historians
just see a market change in this period
in the amount of records that are taken
and as a result our understanding or
what do we see?
>> amount rests on whether you have a cheap
re- cheap writing surface. And here,
rather than looking
first at the Renaissance, let's look at
what we think of as fall of Rome.
Because one of the biggest things that
happens there is that Western and
Northern Europe lose access to papyrus.
Right? So, papyrus is the cheap writing
surface of antiquity. It is a easy
plant-based writing surface. You take
this tall, thin water reed, you that is
fibrous like asparagus, you slice it
into ribbons, you set them out in the
sun, a bunch of them parallel to each
other sitting on a stone like noodles,
you put a second row of noodles
perpendicular to that on top, and then
they dry in the sun, and they're
naturally sticky. They stick to each
other, they produce a sheet. Practically
no labor has gone into this. You've
sliced, you've laid out, boom.
Papyrus is a very inexpensive writing
surface. And this is what enables Rome
to have a bureaucracy and to have
libraries in any mid-size city will have
a library. People can send letters back
and forth. There can be enormous tax
records. Sometimes when Egypt and Rome
are at war, Egypt will really be like,
"No, we are angry. You will stop
exporting papyrus. No papyrus Rome." And
then Rome's infrastructure will fall
apart overnight because you can't do
anything if you can't write stuff down.
Papyrus is a warm weather plant. It is
killed by frost. You cannot grow it
north of the frost line.
So, France,
Spain, even most of Italy, you can only
grow papyrus down in the very tip and
down in Sicily, right? Um
without papyrus,
what you're writing on is a dead sheep.
And if you think of the price of a head
of lettuce and the price of a leather
jacket,
you're understanding the difference
between a sheet of papyrus
and writing on a dead sheep. So, every
page of a medieval book
is as expensive as that much of a
leather leather jacket. And a medieval
book on parchment cow handwritten costs
as much as a house.
So, that a small pocket copy of a book
costs as much as a studio condo. And a
big illuminated fancy Bible, you're
spending on that what you would spend on
a villa in the countryside. Right? This
is an enormous expense. And so, to have
a library is to be not just rich, but
mega rich. So, only the wealthiest
cities contain anybody who has a
library. The great library of the
University of Paris, the library from
Europe's perspective, has 600 books.
There's definitely more than 600 books
in this room.
Right? Every kiosk at an airport selling
Dan Brown novels has more than 600
books. This is nothing. And at the same
time as that, right? In the Middle East,
sultans have libraries of over 1,000
books or 5,000 books. There are
libraries in sub-Saharan Africa with
thousands of books. There are libraries
in China with thousands of books.
Because they in China have cheap paper
and rice paper. The Middle East has
papyrus. Europe, and only Europe, is
writing on all other jack. And so, what
changes around this time? How how's
Europe able to get the the paper? So,
well, so still zooming in on fall of
Rome. Yeah. Uh Rome had lots and lots of
books on papyrus. They start falling
apart cuz papyrus is brittle.
Most of our knowledge from antiquity is
not lost at the burning of the Library
of Alexandria. It's lost between 400 and
600 AD when the papyri are falling
apart.
And here you are with a library of a
thousand books, and you can only afford
to make 100 new books. So, you have to
choose which hundred of these thousand
do we save? Cuz there literally is not
enough industry on your continent to
make enough leather to copy down all
this text. You have to pick. And so, the
majority of what we lost from antiquity,
we lost then. We lost when the papyri
were falling apart. And this is also
what distorted what survived because
most of the copying out was done by
monks.
And when you have a thousand books and
you can only save a hundred of them, and
you're a monk, you're like, what do I
save? I know, Saint Augustine. I love
Saint Augustine. This is why we have
more surviving work by Saint Augustine
than the entirety of all pagan classical
Latin.
Because the subjective tastes of the
people in power at the moment the papyri
were falling apart ended up being an
unintentional moment of censorship that
biased what survives from antiquity. So,
paper technology hits Europe in 800 AD.
So, we're talking about a 400 year
famine of a cheap writing surface. Paper
is nowhere near as cheap as uh papyrus
because you need to gather rags from
used clothing. You then immerse them in
water, and you beat them violently using
a mill for a very long time until they
become a pulp. You then scoop that pulp
up on a screen, and the fibers lock
together. It's a sort of a slurry that
looks like grits.
Uh and you lift up the slurry and then
it locks together into a sheet of paper.
So, it's not as cheap as just growing
papyrus and it's much more labor. You
have to build a paper mill. So, if
parchment we think of as like a leather
jacket and papyrus we think of as like
buying a head of lettuce, this is
somewhere in between like buying um
what's in between a leather jacket and
This feels like a weird
>> This is
>> [laughter]
>> a trick question. This is somewhere in
between like getting yourself a dozen
frozen pre-packaged meals.
>> Right. Right, which are complex and have
many ingredients that a lot of industry
went into producing the actual
packaging, etc. more so than a head of
lettuce. So, it's 10 times as expensive,
but it's still a tenth as much as the
leather jacket. So,
um paper comes in. People are very wary
of paper. Paper is clearly not as strong
as papyrus as as parchment. Parchment is
really tough stuff.
Uh people start using paper for rough
drafts,
letters,
sketchbooks. When when you're doing the
sketch before doing a painting, you
might do that on paper. Uh but Europe
has paper for 400 years before the
earliest state document ever written on
paper. To give you a sense of how people
are wary of it. And it disseminates
slowly.
Um and it's still expensive. It
requires, you know, industry and and
production, but it is a tenth as
expensive as leather. So, paper
disseminates slowly through Europe. And
again, this is one of these there was
always a technological change. Yeah. And
all technological changes are gradual.
So, paper comes in in 800, it's sort of
being trusted by 1200
uh when printing begins. They're
printing on paper, but they even print
on vellum.
Uh if you're really a rich person, you
would be like, "Please print, you know,
two copies on vellum for me."
Uh so, dukes like the Dukes d'Este, the
sister Isabella d'Este, the sister of
the duke who walked around buck naked uh
to show off that he could. His sister
specially ordered all of her books to be
printed on vellum,
even when the rest of the print run was
on paper. These are the very books that
are being produced in Venice by the
apprentices of Gutenberg who ran away,
those guys. So, at that moment in the
1490s, if you're really rich, you might
be invested in this newfangled printed
books, but you're still not trusting
paper, even though paper's been there
for at that point 600 years.
So, again, gradual adoption of
technologies, right? And gradual trust
in paper. And they're still using
parchment for things
gradually less and less, but
substantially over the course of the
1600s. You can even find things written
on parchment in the 1700s and 1800s.
British Parliament still do it did its
records on parchment up until 10 years
ago, and the Vatican still does its
official records on parchment now.
Interesting. So,
this is a digression, but the
the numbers of like how how expensive a
book is didn't make sense to me just
based on how much scribe time it took.
>> Right. Um where you say like it's
$600,000 per book, and I'm like and then
separately it's 5 months of scribe time,
and I'm like how much are the scribes
getting paid? But if it's if it's the
paper, but then what what changes with
Gutenberg? Cuz like
>> and the ink and
uh
um but a lot of it is scribe time. So,
then but Gutenberg still needs paper,
right? Yeah, Gutenberg needs paper,
that's why he goes bankrupt, right? So,
he he borrows the equivalent of about
$1.5 million worth of money to buy
paper.
>> and then doesn't make back $1.5 million
worth of
material when printing it. And this is
what makes printing a risk, right? Cuz
you have to start buying the paper up
front. You need to buy it in a big lot
so that it matches, cuz people don't
want the paper to suddenly be a
different color with their book. So,
you're investing a lot up front, and
you're not getting anything back until
you produce this slow print run, which
is why printers start printing
pamphlets, cuz they can have one press
that's slowly printing a valuable book
that'll take 6 months to print. Well,
next to it they have another press
that's printing pamphlets where in 2
days they've printed a fashion report on
what everyone was wearing at the royal
wedding, which they can sell right away.
And it's much cheaper, but it means they
have something they can sell two or
three times a week. Uh so, the pamphlet
following the book as printing cheap
news, printing scandal.
>> it cheaper? Cuz the material's cheaper?
>> Oh, just because it's only five pages
long. Oh, I see. You got it. Okay. I I
can grab one if you want to see one.
So, if we look at some examples
of parchment
and whoop, need the little guys.
I'll show you some of these one by one.
For example, this is a pamphlet.
Uh naked pages, short text,
hand-stitched together. It would take
two or four days to print a pamphlet
like that. It's cheap, it's ephemeral.
You print a thousand of them, you sell a
bunch around the town, you sell a bunch
to news writers who are going to and
from other cities, right? Who will buy
them and bring them to the next town.
So, if you printed news in Milan, people
who are going to Florence will want to
buy your news to go there. And it might
be, you know, a report of a siege. It
might be um uh here's what the people
were wearing at the royal wedding. It
might be My favorite ever ti- title of a
pamphlet was The Scandalous Tale of a
Doctor from Padua and how he seduced his
maid, murdered his wife, murdered the
maid, cut out her heart and ate it, and
how he was justly punished by God. That
was the title of the pamphlet. Uh
[laughter]
these things circulated around. Some of
them were nonsense, some of them were
real news, most of them were were
combinations. But, you can sell
something like this cheaply in a couple
of days. And often they would have a
cheap blue cover. You have seen this
color before. This is the color of
laundry lint cuz fundamentally laundry
lint is what paper is. You take rags of
old clothes, you put them in water, you
beat them until they become a pulp, you
skim it out with a sieve. Uh laundry
lint is what rag paper is. And if you
don't bleach it, it's this sort of
generic blue-gray color, which is the
average color
that human beings wear. That's a copy of
The Gentleman's Magazine, another
example of technology taking a leap
forward in the 18th century. Uh when
they invented the newspaper, they
immediately had the problem of oh no,
newspapers contradict each other. We
don't know what's true. We have to
fact-check stuff. Oh, that one has a
great foldout. I think there's a
procession or something. So, instead of
photographs, we have this fancy here is
what everyone was wearing at the state
funeral, very exciting. Um Uh so
your laundry lint, if you don't bleach
it, you know, it remains the color that
it on average was. In the 18th century,
they have newspapers. The newspapers are
reporting news. The newspapers don't
quite say the same thing as each other.
And so then the problem is how do we
know who to trust? So, The Gentleman's
Magazine was developed and every week
they would publish a roundup of that
week's news saying what each newspaper
said about it and where they
contradicted each other and analyzing
who's right and wrong. It was the
fact-checking. This is the first
magazine. It invented the word magazine
being used in this context. And it was
an intellectual response to the fake
news problem of how do we reconcile what
happens with newspapers.
Um so, many iterations of you know, they
invent the printing press, then they
invent the pamphlet, then they invent
the newspaper, then they invent the
magazine to cope with the newspaper. The
newspaper is invented to cope with the
pamphlet because you don't know whether
to trust the scandalous tale of the
doctor from Padua and how he murdered
his wife. Is he real? We don't know. But
if somebody publishes a newspaper that
serially prints news every week, they
have a um
reputation. They have to be respectable.
You're not going to subscribe to them if
you catch them printing nonsense. So,
the uh the serial nature of a newspaper
was a form of accountability that made
people willing to trust it over time.
So, the newspaper is a way of
fact-checking the pamphlet. The pamphlet
is a way of making money while you're
printing your longer book. I will also
let you have a look at papyrus. Thank
you. So, you can see the sort of plaid
pattern of the papyrus because it um
is made of the two layers of strips.
Uh and there's a papyrus scroll. That's
modern papyrus. The thing about papyrus
is that in addition to being cheap, it's
very brittle. Um it works better in a
scroll than it is folded over because
the folded edge cracks really easily.
So, if you try to make this into a codex
book, it's going to be very fragile as a
codex book. And then here you go. This
is a real 17th century letter in
absolutely indecipherable handwriting.
In parchment. In on parchment. You can
even tell cuz that's cheap parchment
which side was the outside of the animal
and which side was the inside of the
animal.
You know, the handwriting is in some
sense bad, but it's also like
very well aligned in a way that's like
>> and precise.
>> Yeah.
But here is good parchment.
That
is hard to believe that it's animal
skin.
So, these are pages from a book of hours
from about 1480.
And individually hand calligraphed. You
can see that one has a whole through it.
Yeah.
And they wrote around the hole.
Huh. Because too valuable to not use
that sheet, right? These are paper thin.
And you can barely tell if you look
carefully which side was the outside of
the animal and which was the inside cuz
one side has pores.
Tiny little speckles
of pores.
So,
>> is this from?
Uh book of hours. This is probably a
French book of hours. A book of hours is
a personal prayer book. Uh Bible quotes,
um
objects of meditation. Mhm. So, the book
would be fat and small. This was the
most common manuscript in the Middle
Ages. And you would have you would carry
it around in your pocket. You'd pull it
out different times of day for uh
personal prayer. But, it also has big
margins so that you can take notes in
it, write down addresses, friends, write
notes in it. You collect your You use it
almost like a day planner. Right. It's
sort of the smartphone of the period in
which you make make all your notes and
and information or write down people's
names. You might have celebrities you
meet sign your Book of Hours. Uh so, all
sorts of neat things go into the margins
as you use this as a way of organizing
the day.
Um but, you can imagine That would be
actually be ex- extremely interesting,
um
a collector's item of like random
people's Book of Hours and what kinds of
things they recorded.
>> Yeah. But, just think about again, think
of a leather jacket, but how much more
industrial effort went into making
leather Right.
>> literally paper thin
like this. Yeah. Huge amounts of
industrial effort going into making the
pages of
such a book. Um my favorite example of
this kind of
distribution and diffusion being taking
longer than you would think for a very
fundamental old technology. Well, now
this is my favorite example. Now, my
second favorite example is um oil. So, I
had interviewed Daniel Yergin who wrote
this big book about the history of oil.
And um
in the 1860s,
uh Drake strikes oil in Pennsylvania.
Mhm. And um
it's in the 1910s
that car is invented, internal
combustion engine
is put into a thing which you sell
millions of copies of. And until then,
oil is just used for the kerosene.
Right. Which is just for lighting. And
the actual gas is just thrown away. And
and in fact, when the lightbulb was
invented, people were wondering whether
Standard Oil was going to go bankrupt.
Because the main use case has gotten
away. Uh neat. I mean, I always think of
those uh
in Julius Caesar's description of Roman
of Britain when the Romans first get to
Britain. He says, "The people of Britain
are so poor, they don't they can't
afford to burn wood, so they burn
rocks."
And we know he's talking about coal. Oh,
I thought it was I thought it was I
thought it was satire. No,
>> [laughter]
>> he's talking about coal.
>> Hilarious. And they had coal in the days
of Julius Caesar, but they didn't figure
out its massive industrial utility until
many, many, many, many, many, many, many
years later. Yeah.
Yeah. There there is this interesting
question of why the Romans didn't have
the Industrial Revolution cuz they had
these huge silver mines in Spain and so
on, but no coal.
>> you have the Industrial Revolution when
you feel you need to.
And that's the thing about Gutenberg as
well that a lot of people don't think
about because people are like,
"Gutenberg was an inventor and invented
a thing and then it had an impact." No.
He was living in the middle of a library
building boom in which there was a huge
demand for books that spiked. He
invented the invention in response to
that cultural change. It isn't by chance
that we got the printing press in 1450.
There was a huge boom of library
building starting in the 1410s.
And inventors were trying to figure out
ways to make books cheaper. They were
making smaller books. They were using
paper more. They were trying to do this.
Paper surges before the Gutenberg
movable type printing press. So,
Gutenberg isn't a random genius out of
nowhere. It's at this point it was the
moment that people needed more books. We
were going to get the invention. One
thing you say in passing in the book is
Martin Luther comes up at the exact
right time because if you've got someone
like Rouleau in the 1490s and he's this
another prophet type, I guess he's the
modern analog is something like Khomeini
in Iran, you know, sets up the kind of
government but too early and Machiavelli
you say is too late because of the
censorship is already in place.
And
what is the censorship that is in place
by the time of Machiavelli? What is the
alternative world where
>> Well, I mean Machiavelli remembers is
contemporary with Luther. Um, it's just
that he circulates his stuff very
briefly and very privately. He doesn't
want a pamphlet version of his ideas out
there cuz he only wants Florence to have
it.
>> Yeah. Um, uh, Luther
hits the
sweet spot when the pamphlet
distribution network had just developed.
>> Yeah. Hence, you know, when Savonarola
printed pamphlets, they only circulated
around Florence and its neighbors,
Siena, Pisa. It took months for them to
get farther. His movement was quickly
crushed. When Luther makes the 95 theses
public, they're in print in London in 17
days after he releases them in
Wittenberg because the pamphlet runners
go vroom vroom vroom vroom vroom vroom
vroom vroom and get the news there and
things are printed overnight
and and come out that fast.
>> like you're hinting that within the next
two decades there's a new censorship
regime across Europe.
>> regime uh, responds and the the the
censorship regime is very effective at
shaping what is printed in books
but can never keep up with pamphlets.
In the same way that we can, you know,
the government can pressure CNN.
The government can't pressure random
people on a social media network. You're
not going to be able to keep up with
that speed. And one of the funny
problems that the Inquisition always had
when trying to um,
uh, persecute printers is
printers worked in the information
distribution industry. They had they
were the people who paid the news
writers. Whose job it is to move as fast
as humanly possible between cities.
Which meant that
news always reached them first. So, if a
printer was ever convicted by the
Inquisition, they would find out before
the Inquisition could possibly get there
to arrest them.
And so the Inquisition never succeeded
at arresting printers. They've always
skipped town
by the time the Inquisition gets there
because if you employ the news writers,
you find out first
what's going on. The Inquisition can't
keep up.
And when we look at censorship,
you know, there's an intersection of
four factors as to whether censorship is
possible. One of them is law. Is it
legal for the censorship to happen? But
another one is the technology. Is it
actually possible to censor this thing?
And you cannot censor whatever moves the
information fastest because it will move
the information faster than you can
move. And even if that one printer had
to skip town, he will set up shop
somewhere else, a new person will take
over his shop, the information will
still move. So, pamphlets become
unpoliceable.
You can try to police them. You can
partially police them. But keeping
pamphlets from moving around, they're
anonymous, they're quick, they're
produced overnight, they move quickly,
you just can't keep up with them. I
guess couldn't they just punish print
shops for publishing things which they
you just hey, take a guess at what we'll
like and if we if you don't like it,
we'll punish you, which is kind of how
censorship in China works, for example.
>> And the Yeah, the printer skips town.
The printer moves to the next town.
And there is a cost to that, right?
There's there's no not no human cost to
evading that. You've You've had to leave
your home and friends behind and move to
a new place, but they don't get you. Uh
and it's very easy to deny that the
pamphlet came from you at all.
So, the print industry proves very
difficult to censor. And we're
experiencing the same thing with social
media, right? Now everyone is like,
"Censor the pornography on X social
media channel." And they're like, "We
just can't. It's too vast. There's too
much." Or "Censor the hate speech." "We
just can't. There's too vast. There's
too much." Uh there were too many
pamphlets and they could crack down on
one particular pamphlet shop. Uh we have
records of this. There's a brilliant uh
analysis in Antal Matitsin's book, Um
The Specter of Skepticism in the Age of
Enlightenment. Brilliant book, brilliant
scholar. He has a great description of
from the notes of a read on a
clandestine bookshop. This wasn't the
printer, this was the underground
bookshop that was selling illegal books.
And they're raided and it has all the
details of, you know, how angry the
people were about different things that
the shop had. So, there was censorship
and there were crackdowns, but it was a
censorship that could not
actually prevent circulation. It could
restrict it. It could make it harder. It
could make it scary, but it couldn't
prevent it.
Interesting. Okay, so before books
become cheap,
you've got people who are
unless you're fantastically wealthy,
you're reading the same couple of books
if you've ever read a book again and
again through your life. And
>> Cosimo de Medici's father owned, I think
it was 12 books. And I want to
understand the intellectual significance
of rereading the exact same book again
and again. Like, maybe the reason
Petrarch loved Cicero so much is like,
imagine reading the same book like 20
times and like hitting the same joke
again and just meditating on every
single
I don't know. There's got to be a
different intellectual culture as a
result of taking these things
distributing the the equivalent of the
Bible.
>> Yeah, well, and you you really
feel like you get to know the person
intimately. You develop a personal
relationship with the ancient author.
You are participating in a conversation
across the diaspora of time. Yeah. And
it's a one-way conversation. You're
responding to them, the future will
respond to you.
Um but there is a great deal of
intimacy. I mean, Petrarch talks about
his friend Cicero.
Uh and being betrayed by his friend
Cicero when he finds new works of Cicero
that he hadn't read and which Cicero's
some of Cicero's letters which Cicero is
not following his own stoic
philosophical precepts and is
being petty and and and yelling at
people about real estate and getting all
upset after his daughter's death and you
know how people get kind of manic when
there's been a death in the family and
start quarreling about everything.
Cicero gets like that and Petrarch is
heartbroken. Cuz to him it means even
the wisest man in history could not
conquer that urge to become irrational
and petty in the face of grief.
Interesting. If that if even Cicero
became irrational and petty in the face
of grief, does that mean humanity is
doomed to forever be irrational uh and
petty in the face of grief. Uh and he
talks about Cicero breaking his heart
and his foot because the book fell on
his foot and broke it and he got a bad
infection and he was bedridden for
months. Um
Um totally different topic, but
around this time
Okay, not around the time of Petrarch. I
know we're jumping around a lot, but
in the
1492, Columbus
comes to the New World. They discover
the New World. What is the What is the
reception of this news?
>> I was just at a conference a week ago
in which we confirmed that there's a
Vatican document from like 1100
or maybe 1200, I forget the exact year,
that recognizes the existence of
Vinland, i.e. Canada.
Where they got the information from the
Vikings.
>> I understand. Um but they thought it was
just a little thing. But yeah.
>> rediscovering the New World and um
it does is it is it I mean today would
it be the equivalent of we just found
there's aliens or why why wasn't it more
to the extent it wasn't why wasn't it
considered
a more significant like this is a main
thing happening right now. We've
discovered the New World. Um
Yeah, I mean that's fun. And uh you
know, when I teach my class on the
1490s, the students, many of whom are
American, always have trouble wrapping
their heads around the people thinking
that the New World isn't a big deal.
A big part of it is that they find the
Caribbean islands and they find the
coast and they think this is small.
Yeah. Right? The way I put it to my
students is
uh the news comes back, we've found
something across the water to the west.
It might be even as big as the Canary
Islands.
Right? They They found something, but
they don't realize they've found
something the scale of Europe and
Africa. Actually, it's not as big as
Europe and Africa, but you know, that
they found something humongous.
Um, that's part of it. Another part of
it is no matter how big and important
something far away is, it's hard to
bring your mind out of the petty
squabbles that are happening
you, especially when they feel like life
or death. Right? So, if if it's 1492,
what is happening? France is about to
invade Italy.
Uh, Europe might be embroiled in the
largest war it's seen in 50 years. The
papacy has just been taken over by
Spain. Spain is suddenly trying to throw
its weight around in Europe in a way
that's unprecedented. The Ottomans have
just invaded Italy and Hungary and might
be coming again. Also, over there,
there's a new thing. Okay, great. We'll
worry about that when we're not having
three wars at the same time. Guys, we're
having three wars at the same time. Oh
my god, and then Martin Luther hits hits
Europe like a ton of bricks when they
still haven't even figured out that this
is a continent and not an island. Right?
So, in the same way that if you're in a
country and it's having a tumult, you
worry a lot about its tumult even if a
larger tumult is happening in a faraway
country.
It's hard to bring your mind out of
Europe at crisis to be like, "Hey, is
there anything?" The other is they're
inventing lots of new things and it
falls into the sphere along the rest,
right? They're discovering the existence
of sub-Saharan Africa.
Um, which they thought that there was
basically one country's worth of stuff
south of the Sahara, Ethiopia, and
nothing else. And then they're like, "Oh
my god, there's a whole big thing that
sticks out." Um, they're also
discovering that the heart is a pump. I
mean, that's a bit later, but they're
discovering all sorts of, uh, stuff at
the same time. So, the discovery of the
New World, especially when they realize
how big it is, becomes a intellectual
challenge where they say, "Wait, does
this mean all the maps we've had are
wrong? Does this mean the ancients were
wrong about geography? Does it mean the
world is a lot bigger than we used to
think the world is? Let's worry about
that the same way we worry about
revolutionizing our mathematics and
figuring out that
uh the
sun doesn't go around the Earth. These
are things that are paradigm shifting.
But, on the other hand, does it matter
whether the sun goes around the Earth or
the Earth around the sun when the French
are invading right now and we need to
get to defenses going and there's a
giant civil war happening and we're
about to be betrayed?" It does matter,
but it also doesn't matter. And so, in
the same way that any decade is
concerned by its tumults and often fails
to recognize the importance of what's
around it.
Uh
that's true of every decade. A one fun
game when I study history of censorship,
which I work a lot on. My next
non-fiction book is going to be a book
on uh history of censorship. And
whatever
they're looking at
they're always wrong from our
perspective about what they should be
worried about censoring. Right? If we
had a time machine and our goal is to
like go give them advice. So, here we
are in the French Enlightenment.
Voltaire and Rousseau and La of
materialist
atheism are flying around Europe. Uh
and what is the Inquisition worried
about? It's worried about Jansen's
treatises about the Trinity.
And Jansenism is sort of like a
Calvinist version of Catholicism, right?
Uh do you want to have an incredibly
terrifying authoritarian God who hates
you and tells you that your soul is a
worthless spider that deserves to be
hurled into fire, but also have to obey
the arbitrary Pope in Rome? Then
Jansenism is for you. Has all of the
grimness of Calvinism and all of the
authoritarian centrality of of the Roman
Catholics.
And this was a heresy that was abroad in
the late and they are so much more
worried about Jansenism than they are
about Voltaire. That very chapter in
Matiesen's book I mentioned where they
are raiding the clandestine bookshop and
they're like Voltaire, fine. The banned
encyclopedie, which is going to
revolutionize all thought in Europe,
fine.
Letters of Diderot, you know, Rousseau,
fine. Jansenist treatises on the nature
of the Trinity, throw the book at these
guys. This is the worst thing. They
really are obsessed with this incredibly
petty minor heresy to the degree that
when the encyclopedie is banned by Rome,
France likes the encyclopedie, right?
This is Diderot and d'Holbach's big
project of universal education to print
an encyclopedie that will collect all
world knowledge. They articulated as
should a new dark age come upon
humankind and even one copy of the
encyclopedie survive, it will be
sufficient to reconstruct all human
progress, right? That's the goal of this
thing. And it's advancing incredibly
radical ideas about biology, about
statecraft, about reforming the law to
be rational instead of traditional, all
sorts of stuff.
Um,
when that is banned by Rome, Paris is
commanded, you know, Paris loves this
book. The king likes this book. The
queen likes this book. She's on record
saying it was so cool being able to look
up the technology that we used to make
her silk pantyhose, right? She just
loves it. Everybody loves it. France
allows it to circulate despite its
controversial content, but Rome says,
"No, you must ban this book." And so
they they agree they're going to have
the ceremonial burning and they mark the
march the encyclopedie up to the fire.
>> [gasps]
>> And then they get some Jansenist
treatises about the nature of the
Trinity and burn those instead because
they don't want to burn the
encyclopedie. They love it. They want to
burn this other thing. And this is
always true. If we had a time machine
for the Inquisition in um the 1540s, we
would we would say like guys,
Machiavelli, he's really important. He's
really revolutionary. You got to be
looking at this. Or we would say
Lucretius's De rerum natura, which I did
my dissertation on and many people are
familiar with Greenblatt's book The
Swerve, which accredits a lot of change
to the materialist science that this
poem articulates. There's a much more
complex story, which you know is told in
my book, uh which refers to to
Greenblatt's and if anyone enjoyed The
Swerve, you would really enjoy uh the
more detailed zoom in that that um
Inventing the Renaissance has. But uh
you know, we would say guys, you should
censor this. We literally have letters
of inquisitors writing to each other
saying, we don't need to bother with
censoring Lucretius.
Uh only learned people can read it and
they know perfectly well that the false
stuff is false, so it'll just circulate
and it's fine. What we need to worry
about censoring is all of these fine two
minutiae of Protestantism. So like the
edition of the index of banned books uh
says in its introduction, we shall put
the names of arch heretics in all caps.
And when I first read that, I was like,
"Ooh, I want to see all my favorite arch
heretics be in all caps." And I eagerly
flipped to M and Machiavelli is not in
all caps. He was not important enough
from their position. The all caps
authors are all minor Protestant
theologians. They're all people who are
like Calvin and Zwingli and Luther and
Melanchthon. They're all doing stuff
that we would say does not matter.
Uh but A era is always wrong about what
ideas and what circulation and what
changes are the really big ones and are
always much much more worried about, "Oh
my god, the prince of Spain, which
princess is he going to marry? This is
going to determine whether Spain is or
isn't annexed by Germany. This is the
most important thing that has ever
happened in the entire history of time."
And people are like, "We've discovered
another continent." And they're like,
"We don't care. We don't want to know
who's going to marry Charles." That
that's a very profound observation. Um I
the the it was really interesting to
learn from your book that of all the
thousands of people killed in during the
Inquisition,
one guy was executed for science or
religious stuff. Yeah. And even he had
these ideas of reincarnation that were
So, I think probably the number executed
for atheism would be about 100.
>> Okay. Um there are 12 total trials of
scientists about science. Galileo is
one, Giordano Bruno is one, Giordano
Bruno is the only one executed. Of those
12 trials, only three were convicted.
And hundreds of thousands of trials for
Judaizing, which is theoretically
contaminating Christianity with Jewish
thought, and and all of these other
minutiae of oppression and segregation
of populations, executions for paganism,
meaning practicing your indigenous
religion in a colonized space, hundreds
of thousands of executions for that, one
for science. Um I recently got
interested in the story of Kepler just
cuz the way he discovers the laws of
planetary motion is so whimsical with
the theory of Platonic objects. Anyway,
so I was learning more about it.
He um
at some point while he's going through
Brahe's data and coming up with the laws
of planetary motion, he is the imperial
mathematician for the Habsburg emperor,
which basically means that he's doing
astronomy and I'm sorry, astrology for
the astrology for generals. Like, will
we will we win the battle or whatever?
Um and then he gets excommunicated. Not
for the laws of planetary motion, but
because he's a Lutheran.
>> Lutheran, that's right, for the
Lutheranism. Um and in fact, his mother
is tried for witchcraft. Has nothing to
do with the science, just cuz she's also
a Lutheran. Yeah, Milton, uh of Paradise
Lost fame, wrote our first big defense
of the free press.
And this is in the moment in the early
1600s when England doesn't yet have
systematic censorship law. It has ad
hoc, "Hey, this book is bad." But it
doesn't have systematic, "You must
submit all books to a censor." the way
the Catholic world does by that point.
The Catholic world developed it in order
to fight Protestantism.
Um and there's a there's a lot of
support for creating censorship in
England at the time because there's
anxiety about papists plotting against
our nice non-Catholic
country trying to undermine it.
Um there's a you know general feeling of
anxiety, but also there's deliberate
moral panic, right? Whipped up by
politicians and and power-seeking people
who whip up a deliberate deliberate
moral panic about books. The same way in
1954 there was a moral panic about comic
books or the same way there was a moral
panic about Dungeons & Dragons in the
'90s, right? Um there's a moral panic
about scary and dangerous books and
pamphlets. And so there's a movement to
create state censorship for the first
systematic systematic time in England.
And Milton writes this big treatise
about why freedom of the press is
important, the Areopagitica. Beautifully
written rhetorical piece that presents
the importance of, you know, we must
trust truth
to to rise purely to the top. We must
let free voices move, otherwise you're
going to create a situation where people
are writing for the censor first and for
the public second. It will sort of
constrain people's thought in the way
that we know chilling effects and fear
do. It's a beautiful treatise.
He fails. The censorship regime passes.
Paradise Lost is published under the
censorious regime. It goes through the
censorship. The one line they tell him
to change is about astrology. They're
like, "It's perfectly fine having Satan
be your charismatic protagonist and God
be kind of a jackass and
and also having Satan spout rhetoric
ferocious anti-monarchical
rhetoric copied from revolutionary
pamphlets that are circulating in the
British colonies so that he's actually
parroting Republican anti-monarchical
rhetoric, very dangerous stuff in the
treatise. That's fine. But this one line
about a comet causing a thing to happen,
no no no no no. Astrology is going to
confuse people's souls and you're like,
guys,
>> [laughter]
>> here speaking as a time traveler,
you're so wrong about what you're
censoring. But they always are. You have
one sentence which I couldn't trace
down,
which I have found very interesting
where you said, in the late 17th
century, the most extensive library in
all of Europe is the one in the Vatican
run by the inquisitors. Not the library,
the most extensive
experimental laboratory.
>> I meant to say, yeah. Um, Daniele
Maccullia is the scholar there. That's
from his dissertation. Though I think
it's been published now, but I don't
know if it's actually out in English.
It's out in Italian. And he works on the
inquisition in the immediate aftermath
of Galileo. Cuz they saw themselves as
guarantors of truth and of accuracy and
information. And so they decided after
Galileo that they had a duty to verify
the truth of the books that they were
sent to censor. And then if people were
going to be doing mechanical
experiments, they needed to repeat the
mechanical experiments to see whether
they were true. So they effectively the
inquisition invented peer review.
>> [laughter]
>> Which is to say they invented a second
laboratory trying to recreate the
results of the first. And they're these
amazing people who by day are
inquisitors and by night are going home
to write their own scientific treatises
as they do these experiments. It's not
what we expect. Interesting. Um, but
history is never what we expect.
Seems like a good place to close.
Ada, thank you very much. Thank you.